[WIND BLOWING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
ACTOR AS CHOGYAM TRUNGPA:
"Although I live in the slime
and muck of the dark
age, although I stumble
in the thick black
fog of materialism,
the tradition of
meditation is waning,
and we are drunk with
spiritual pride."
MAN: This is regarded
as a very dark age
and a time in which the world's
wisdom has in some sense faded.
ACTOR AS CHOGYAM TRUNGPA: "This
is the time of hell on Earth.
Sadness is always with us.
And unceasing depression
fills our minds."
[GUNSHOTS]
WOMAN 1: The
Chinese had invaded.
And there was a time before
that when Tibet was really,
you might say, a
spiritual paradise.
But now it was like a hell.
The teachings were going
to be lost if they couldn't
be transferred to the West.
And so his whole role in life
was to make that transfer.
WOMAN 2: He had an
urgency about him.
He never gave up on anyone, on
showing us the full potential
of our humanity.
ACTOR AS CHOGYAM
TRUNGPA: "The heretics
and bandits of hope and fear are
transformed into crazy wisdom."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
CHOGYAM TRUNGPA: The
crazy wisdom person,
which is direct translation
from the Tibetan,
what's known as yeshe cholwa,
yeshe, meaning wisdom.
Cholwa is gone wild.
So in this case, it's a
craziness gone wisdom.
We had this conversation
way back in '72,
I think, in San Francisco.
We were comparing
our itineraries.
And I said, don't you get tired
of constantly going around?
I'm getting a little
tired of running around.
He said, oh, that's because
you don't like your poetry.
And I said, I already
know about my poetry.
And he said, well, why don't you
do like the great poets of old,
like Milarepa?
Why don't you just get up on
stage and compose on the tone?
Why do you need
a piece of paper?
Don't you trust your own mind?
[THUNDER CLAPPING]
ACTOR AS CHOGYAM
TRUNGPA: "The red flag
flies above the Potala.
The people of Tibet are
drowned in an ocean of blood.
A vampire army fills the
mountains and plains.
But self-existing
dignity never wanes."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Really that generation
was the last generation
that was able to get that full,
complete training in Tibet
with the great teachers.
My father's meditation and
everything became expedited.
And it became much stronger.
Chogyam Trungpa was
assigned a teacher
who was an extremely,
highly realized human being,
Khenpo Gangshar
Wangpo, which means
"the lord of all that arises."
The monks were often sitting
with their malas, sort
of telling the beads
and reciting the mantra,
om mani padme hum,
om mani padme hum.
And Khenpo Gangshar would come
up and snatch the mala out
of the hands of a monk
and break it apart
and say, om mani
padme hum aggression,
om mani padme hum attachment,
om mani padme hum ignorance!
So he was like cutting
through the fact
that they were just
doing something by rote,
which had no real meaning.
They say, you
must go to see him.
I don't dare it.
I always run away.
I can't bear to go to see--
he says to do something.
I'm terrified.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Chinese, presenting their
doctrine for the communism
and realizing that they can't
actually indoctrinate anybody,
basically, fundamentally,
it's there to use
further great oppression.
Khenpo Gangshar
was telling people
everything that we've been
doing here in terms of Buddhism
is over.
It's finished.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
I was forced to
leave my country.
We were about 300 in a group.
Even Chogyam
Trungpa was so young.
He knows exactly what we
have to do to get away.
Somehow I don't
know how he managed.
He doesn't have a compass.
He has very nice binoculars.
So we can see a long distance.
When we reach other
side, we know now Chinese
are everywhere, shooting guns.
Then we actually end up
cooking our shoe leathers,
chopping it down and cooking it.
And I remember chewing it.
It was so horrible.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My work is dedicated to present
the notion of enlightenment
to the West.
The world is not going to be
saved purely by religion alone.
But the world can be saved
also secular enlightenment.
This world does need your
help so badly, very badly.
And so on behalf of this world--
[LAUGHTER]
--I would like to
request you to come
and do something about it.
It takes enormous faith
in people to create
an enlightened society.
You can't have a
partial attitude.
And that kind of faith wasn't
because we were amazing people.
It was because of Trungpa's
inherent appreciation
for the wisdom of the world.
Afraid to look at things.
Afraid to be decent.
Afraid to smile.
Afraid to acknowledge that
we are basically good.
Or, as Americans call
it, chickening out.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When I first met him,
he was, of course, still
a monk, dressed in
monk's robes, and he
seemed to me extraordinarily
young, ethereal,
almost, as though
he might dissolve
into light at any moment.
A bit like a flower,
a beautiful flower.
All his gestures were
sort of immaculate.
Now I can't actually
remember what he said.
But we were just overwhelmed
by his presence somehow.
It seems almost kind of
a little naive to say
something like that, but there
was something very special
about him.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
He was going through a
period of really examining
how he was going to teach.
He really, I think, wasn't
sure yet what would be the best
way to teach Westerners.
Rinpoche was doing various
courses in order to familiarize
himself with Western culture.
He was trying to gather
the experience directly
for himself of the suffering
of the human condition
in the West.
You got the feeling that
he wanted to sort of reach
into our little bowl
of suffering and say,
this is what's happening, and
to be able to have the words
that we could understand,
that were accessible to us,
that would allow us to say yes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There was an article in
the then Telegraph color
supplement, and there was
a full-page photograph
with Trungpa Rinpoche
and Akong Rinpoche
standing on the lawn in front.
And I'd seen it, and I
thought, I have to be with him.
So I gave up my job and
my house and travelled
up to Eskdalemuir.
I was studying at
Cambridge University.
And I decide I'd prefer
to go live with him.
I arrived at Lockerbie
station late at night.
There was no public
transport to Eskdalemuir.
And so I walked to Samye
Ling, and it's about 17 miles.
And I have I think it must
have taken me about six hours.
His injunction to me always was
that major change must always
be internal and that
without meditation, there's
no progress.
The teaching sometimes would
be really kind of in the minute,
in conversation in his room,
sometimes late at night.
That was where I learned most.
This got some of us
into a lot of trouble,
because we would then have
to sleep late in the morning
and not make morning meditation.
Rinpoche would leave Samye
Ling in his monk's robe
and change into regular clothes
and wander around London a lot.
And he said he loved
the movie houses
because they were
dark red velvet,
and it reminds him of Tibet.
It had the kind of warmth
that he was missing.
I'd been working in an
office as a translator,
and he invited me to be
his private secretary.
He said that he was
planning to make
a trip to Bhutan and India.
And then he asked me if I
would like to go with him.
Well, of course I said yes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
CHOGYAM TRUNGPA:
My trip to Bhutan
was invitation of
the queen of Bhutan.
And I took my retreat
in Taktsang, whereupon
sometime I actually meditated.
Rinpoche said that
this was supposedly
where Guru Padmasambava had
thrown down his crystal rosary
and then it turned
into a waterfall.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Being at Taktsang is not
particularly impressive
toward the beginning.
What is this place that's
supposed to be great?
And what's happening here?
Maybe this is the wrong
place to have chosen.
Maybe there's Taktsang somewhere
else, the real Taktsang.
But there is actually immense
energy and powers taking pace.
Things begin to come up.
ACTOR AS CHOGYAM TRUNGPA:
"Although I live in the slime
and much of the
dark age, although
I stumble in the thick,
black fog of materialism"--
CHOGYAM TRUNGPA: The
Sadhana just came
through without any problems.
And it took me about five
hours to write the whole thing.
ACTOR AS CHOGYAM
TRUNGPA: "The Dharma
is used for personal gain,
and the river of materialism
has burst its banks.
The materialistic outlook
dominates everywhere."
When the Sadhana arrived in
his mind, it was a realization.
And that's what
was written down,
the whole idea of a dark age.
Spiritual values have been lost.
We can see how much
damage we have done
the planet due to materialism.
And that hypocrisy is awesome.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Trungpa Rinpoche
had come to the West
in order to transmit the
authentic teachings of Buddhism
in the West to Westerners.
Akong wanted the center
in Scotland, Samye Ling,
to be a place where
Tibetan refugees
could come and find a home.
And so they had a very
different outlook.
That's why this huge conflict
developed between them.
People would get very upset
because he wasn't teaching.
People wanted a
teacher to satisfy
their own spiritual
greed so they could say,
I'm a disciple of
Trungpa Rinpoche,
he's doing this to
beat me on the path
of reverberation something.
And then they'd find, actually,
he's not doing anything.
He's just drunk or trying
to seduce my girlfriend
or behaving in a
totally outrageous way.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It was absolutely
electric, that first time I
set eyes on him.
I had never had any experience
like that in my life before.
I was at a school in
Cambridge, and I had to find
a way to get up and see him.
I spent, I believe, at least
24 hours in bed with him.
I think it was the
first time in my life
that I had felt like
that I could have 100%
communication with somebody.
He said to me at
one point, maybe
someday we could get married.
And I said, oh, definitely, yes.
I'd love to do that.
I had to do the
shopping, so it meant
driving into nearby towns,
which is partly I taught
Chogyam and Akong to drive.
They were hopeless,
both of them.
They'd never known
roads or traffic.
They didn't grow up with them.
I always thought you
shouldn't let a Tibetan
behind a steering wheel.
I had heard he hadn't been
the best driver in the world.
He was driving with
a girl in the car.
And I don't know if alcohol
was involved or not,
but the car went out
of control, and it went
through a joke shop window.
[CRASHING]
And there was Trungpa
Rinpoche on a gurney
in the hall with huge
stitches in his throat.
His throat had been cut.
And then a while after that,
they discovered that he
was paralyzed on his left side.
He was in such pain.
It took quite a
long time before he
was able to regain some movement
on the left side of his body.
He couldn't cook for himself
or even things like making beds,
not that I ever remember
him wanting to make a bed,
but you couldn't be
with him without being
aware that there was an
extraordinary struggle going on
in there.
I think that that
particular period in Scotland
was really the bleakest
period in his life.
Before the accident,
Trungpa Rinpoche
had spoken about the dilemma
that he felt. The term he used
was "the golden Buddha
on the pedestal."
Our main point is
to be able to teach
fully on the Western world.
And also there's a general
sense of fascination
on the people's part.
And when you talk to
them with the robes on,
they don't look at you or
they don't listen to you,
but they look at your robe.
People just couldn't accept it.
I think people found
it too threatening.
The English people, with
their sense of propriety
and so forth, may
have wanted to have
the sort of little pet guru.
And at the same
time, the Tibetans
wanted him to wear his robes
and hide behind the Tibetan
as a sort of sense of
subtle superiority.
So he was completely out there
and genuine with who he was,
and he was rejected for that.
He said to me that he felt
that he was at a critical point
in his life.
He said, I'm on the verge
of becoming enlightened,
and when people get to this
point, they either go crazy
or they attain
realization, which
of course made me feel
a little bit anxious,
having just married him.
Then it all moved
quite quickly.
And it all seemed
to be the catalyst
for the transformation, the
reemerging into the world,
having abandoned the
monastic persona.
And then the rest, as
they say, is history.
WOMAN: What made you commit to
about three years of your life
to him?
What held you to him?
Well, it wasn't me committing.
It sounds like I made
some generous offer.
I wasn't committing.
Didn't feed like I was
committing my life to him.
I actually loved being with him.
And it's 40 years
ago now. [SOBBING]
But he was a good friend.
[SOBBING]
And he's gone, but
he was a good friend.
So there was no
commitment there.
It just came naturally.
That's what that's
for. [LAUGHING]
So that's it.
He came, and he went.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
He met one of the other
great talkers of pretty
much similar age to him.
They have known each other
in Tibet, Trungpa Rinpoche.
Trungpa Rinpoche came
to India and said, so,
what are you going to do now?
And he took out his
mirror, little metal
mirror he had around his neck.
His mirror was a way
of-- he could prophesize,
sees the future in the mirror.
And he started looking
into this metal mirror
and describing Shambhala.
And he said, it's
as if I was there.
And I can see.
So that's the only clue that he
gave that he was actually going
to America to find Shambhala.
[SINGING - "GIVE PEACE A
CHANCE"]
[EXPLOSIONS]
Stop bombing human beings,
animals, and vegetation.
If Jesus Christ
were here tonight,
you would not dare
drop another bomb.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It was a tumultuous
time and a time
when there was a passionate
search for meaning.
It had to do with a resistance
to the war in Vietnam
and the role of
the United States
in pursuing aggression
in that way.
The motivation for
radical political action
was some kind of insight
about human liberation,
that human beings had a
vast potential for freedom,
freedom of expression and
freedom of emotion and freedom
of thought, that there was a
personal side to the journey
of growth, that
personal liberation
and political liberation might
not be separate, that they
actually might be part
of the same journey
or part of the same unfolding.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the summer of '70,
and still summer of love,
we traded our
apartment for a car
and decided to do a road trip.
It turned out really
crazy, psychedelic summer.
So we pulled up in
front of this filthy,
dirty farmhouse
with wrecked cars
and washing machines
in the front porch
and hippies wandering around,
just shabby, rundown house.
We knocked on the door.
This woman was there, Fran.
And she said, what do you do?
And I said, well,
I like an art guy.
She said, oh, my God,
come with me right now.
And she took me into this
little room in the back.
And she opened the door,
and she said, I found him.
And he said, oh, I've
been waiting for you.
Sit down.
He had asked her to go and
find somebody that could draw.
There was a weekend
program happening
called Work, Sex, and Money.
And I thought, I'm
interested in those things,
not necessarily in that order.
I really didn't think
of him as a Buddhist.
I mean, I wasn't really
looking for Buddhism or
any particular religious path.
I just thought he was
someone who spoke the truth.
In fact, I think I
thought he made it up.
He just happened
to be someone who
was so insightful that
he could just point
out the nature of reality.
CHOGYAM TRUNGPA: When we talk
about a Tantric tradition,
we are not talking about purely
playing with sex, aggression,
or colors, phenomena world.
We are not talking
about those areas yet.
We have to be very, very
concerned with the fundamentals
of the whole thing
rather than how things
are going to be OK and groovy.
And don't why.
If you why, that's your problem.
But if you don't know why,
everything's going to be OK.
Let's dance together.
Let's play the music together.
Let's drink the
honey and the milk.
It doesn't work.
He had started drawing this
letter called ah, which means--
it's the seed syllable
for sort of the birth
of everything that's created.
It's the most primary
seed syllable.
It can be summarized as
a dot, a dot in space.
So I sat there for
two hours, and you
he knew how the eye worked.
He knew about geometry.
He knew know Botticelli.
The more it went
on, I was like, this
is the greatest experience.
Finally, an art teacher.
I thought it he was just an art
guy, a hippie, Tibetan hippie.
He immersed himself
completely in American culture
when he moved over here.
It wasn't just that it was
contrived that he was going
to dress like a hippie
and act like a hippie
so he could communicate
with the hippies.
It was that he was
absolutely fascinated
by anything that people did.
He just wanted to
basically eat it up.
At one point I was concerned
about whether you need
to be celibate on
the spiritual path,
because I had been
reading all the Hindu yoga
books that talked
about how important
celibacy was in meditation.
And just as I was
getting to that question
in my little list, there
was a knock on the door.
And it was Diana.
And he said, oh,
come in, sweetie.
And so she was wearing
a yellow bath towel,
just barely covered her.
So I didn't know whether to
look down or whether to look up.
And then he kissed
her, and he said, well,
I'll come to bed soon, sweetie.
So she left, and I didn't
actually ask that question.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
He taught by being
a human being.
He never said, follow
me, imitate me.
He said, I am
completely who I am,
and I want to help
you understand how
to be completely who you are.
And he said, just
study the Dharma, which
is the truth of
trusting who you are,
discovering your own
fundamental goodness,
discovering your natural wisdom,
and discovering the importance
of being compassionate.
That has nothing to
do with religion.
The shrine room was the
attic of an old farmhouse.
And holding up the roof,
seemingly, were these posts.
Well, the posts became the
favorite spot for people
to lean up against during
sitting meditation practice,
so that they could doze
or just hold themselves up
and sort of be lazy about it.
So one day, we go into the
shrine room, and they're gone.
And it was him.
He had been there
two weeks earlier
and said, take them
out, unbeknownst to us.
So how he often would work
is that there would just be,
most of the time, just a
quarter turn of the screw.
It wasn't a big thing.
It was just suddenly
like where you
used to hang out so
that you could slump
was no longer slumpable.
So now you had to
actually sit up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is a picture of the
door at Karme Choling.
You know, it was just a
white door, ratty paint
crumbling farmhouse.
And he said that he wanted
to paint it as the entrance
to the Dharma in the West.
It was very important.
And he explained
to me the geometry,
the sacred geometry,
and how it intersects
with how your eye is wired.
The rods and cones in your
eye are actually wired
into geometric patterns and
how the door, the geometry
of the door, would go
directly into your eye
and set off certain kind
of signals in your brain.
We could not find a turquoise.
We left all this stuff
on the front porch,
and there was a little
girl, about five
years old, that was playing.
And when we were down at
the tent at the teachings,
she had poured all the
paint into a bucket.
And we came back, and
she'd mixed it up,
and it was the
perfect turquoise.
And it was getting dark by then,
so Chogyam said, oh, my God,
it's perfect.
So we took all the
cars and circled around
with the headlights and put
the headlights on the porch
while he sat there
and supervised
me filling in the turquoise.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There is a legend of the
Buddha, where every step,
lotus flowers bloom.
Almost wherever Chogyam
Trungpa in America,
Tibetan Buddhist
centers sprang up.
Very early on, maybe
in the first year,
he invited the entire community
that could fit in his living
room up to visit
him, and he invited
everybody to bring their bags
of marijuana, their dope.
And half the people thought, oh,
my God, this guru is so cool.
He wants to smoke with us.
So everybody came and
was in a very jolly mood.
And he asked everybody to
put all their paraphernalia
on a big tray in the center.
And there was a beautiful
fire going in the fireplace.
It was all very
homey and wonderful.
And he began to
talk to everybody
and welcome everybody.
And then one little
bag after the other
got thrown into the fire,
creating all of this spark
and popping.
And he began to chant, we
are burning self-deception,
we are burning self-deception,
with each bag.
And the fire would blaze up.
Supposing if you, so-called
you, which we do not
know whether we exist
or not, but so-called
you become enlightened.
Then what?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Of course automatically
the answer
is then, of course I become
a Buddha, Enlightened One.
You are about to
become egomaniac.
You are becoming egomaniac.
Not only you are about to, you
are thinking that you could
become the Buddha himself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Naropa Institute
the summer of '74
was a kind of a distillation.
It was sort of
like what happened
at Woodstock, that
all of a sudden you
have this huge movement.
It's happening all
over the country.
And it came together.
We didn't have a building.
We didn't have desks.
We didn't have telephones.
We didn't have stationery.
We had this idea, vision.
We invited religious
figures, including
Native American
teachers, Zen teachers.
Hindu teachers were invited,
superstars such as Ram Dass,
who arrived with a retinue
of Love and Lighties,
as we called them,
dressed in white.
[SINGING]
There were people there who
weren't on religious trips,
like Gregory Bateson.
We come to Naropa to try to
find out what it's all about.
He invited all these poets.
There was Allen Ginsberg.
And Allen was a
one-man poetry school.
Allen.
Do you relate to American
jazz, blues, rock and roll
as having possibilities?
Maybe jazz has
more possibilities.
Blues has more possibilities.
But rock and roll has
lesser possibilities.
And why do you feel that?
Well, I think-- have you had
the experience, say, of majesty
and calm and
centeredness in any rock
and roll that you've heard?
Unfortunately not.
I tried very hard.
[LAUGHTER]
I thought at some point
I was missing something.
[LAUGHTER]
But then it turned out to be I
wasn't missing anything at all.
[LAUGHTER]
He like the poets.
He liked the artists.
He liked the misfits.
He never seemed to want
to rein in the energy
in terms of setting up an
institution like Naropa.
He kept talking
about sparks flying.
What we were doing was
bringing together East and West.
And that was kind of the
creation of a new hybrid.
And he said normally
people think
of creating some kind of
diplomatic relationship
between East and West,
but what he really
wanted was not to
do that at all,
was to maintain the
integrity of each tradition
and let them come up
against each other
so that sparks would fly.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Water is so lovely, so lovely.
It's like love.
When I arrived at Naropa,
the schedule was set,
and I was put on Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday,
or something like that.
And Trungpa has Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday.
We were both going after truth.
And his way of going
after truth was Buddhist,
and my way of going
after truth was Hindu.
The people liked
getting both sides.
And I was fascinated
with-- they were
like there was a tennis match.
They were like-- they were
Trungpa said this and Ram Dass,
uh, uh.
If we're going to
discuss spirituality
at this point in this
particular class,
I feel very nervous
myself, and so should
you, that we are not to
building mutual deceptions
between each other.
We have coined this word
called "spiritual materialism."
Spiritual materialism, which is
dedicated to pursuing the self,
ego, that you use
mantras, chantings,
meditations, all kinds to become
a greater and powerful person.
He did not give a talk in
the first five or six or eight
years without
reminding people how
foolish their grappling after
spirituality to save themselves
was.
He was cruel from the point
of view of relentlessly
dismantling whatever
you could use
to cling on to some
constructed version of ego.
Let us mock the ego.
But let us build
our spirit, spirit
in this case as a sense of
inquisitiveness that something
might have happened.
There's a possibility
something has taking place.
But ego's approach is that, is
that going to be good for me?
Should I do it?
Shouldn't I do it?
If I get it, how much of it
is money's worth, so to speak?
Trungpa was the head, and I
was the heart, things like soul,
God, Ram, and Krishna
and all that, that seemed
like cluttered compared to him.
It is absolutely important to
make a practice of meditation
as a source of your
strength, source
of your basic intelligence.
And think about that.
You know there is
such a possibility
you could certainly do nothing
for 20 minutes, 10 minutes.
Just sit and do nothing.
You can think about
Naropa Institute
while you're
sitting if you like.
[LAUGHTER]
You shouldn't be too
embarrassed to tell that message
to your parents and
relatives, your friends,
that you've learned
very valuable
message, that you can actually
survive by doing nothing.
Rinpoche had a great
command of English.
He said English is
a blessed language.
He'd speak redneck.
He'd speak (AMERICAN ACCENT)
American Chamber of Commerce,
he'd speak (BRITISH
ACCENT) Oxonian English.
But it wasn't just a mimicry.
His mind sort of entered
into the American mindset
and realize you had to
do it through language.
You used the word
inaccessible in referring
to Vajrayana teachings.
And what was the
implication there?
Well, it's very
rare, and therefore
you probably don't get it.
And like if you order
steak tartare, rare people
order such dish,
and usually somebody
order hamburger or hot dog.
And steak tartare is very rare.
[LAUGHTER]
And a crucial moment came when
the great 16th Karmapa, who
was the head of Chogyam
Trungpa's lineage
is coming to the United States.
He tells you, like the
students, this great news,
the 16th Karmapa's coming,
and the response is, groovy,
but do we really have
to vacuum for him?
He worked tirelessly, hours
and hours around the clock,
getting ready for this visit,
having people go and get
decent clothes,
cutting your hair,
getting suits and ties,
which most people went
to the Salvation Army
to get because nobody
had any money, particularly.
That infuriated people.
Sexuality didn't shock
people in those days.
Drinking didn't shock people.
But wear a suit?
Are you kidding?
So many, many students left
at that point in protest.
All of the forms or
rituals or disciplines
are ways of shifting
the mind, first of all
to create some
kind of wakefulness
so that you can even
appreciate what's going on,
and then to connect us into
the particular activity that's
taking place.
You need a kind
of majesty inside
to meet the majesty
outside of yourself.
What you have recommended to
us is that we should cut off
our long hair, put on neckties,
and reenter the mainstream
of American institutions and
attempt to exert a wholesome
influence from within.
-That's right.
[LAUGHTER]
[HORN HONKING]
We always have a problem
of containing ourselves.
That is why we have to resort
to religion, basically,
taming, [INAUDIBLE],
simply being decent,
no ups and downs, some
sense of equilibrium,
natural state of existence.
That kind of training
demanded a teacher who
was hard to be around a lot.
Once I asked him, why
don't more students
just come see you, knock on the
door or call you on the phone,
come over?
And he said, I feel that
it is because there's
a fear in students of
becoming unmasked, exposed.
This was a very important
principle for him,
people having the
courage to work
with their own self-deception.
Where does purpose
and motivation
come in the enlightened mind
that is free from desire
and striving?
Where does his
purposes come from?
Well, purposes come from having
a sense of trust in oneself,
a sense of uprightness,
a sense of loyalty,
a sense of appreciation
of one's family
and one's immediate
world around you.
There's a cloud in the
sky, and skies are blue,
and the sun rises
beautifully in the East.
And snowflakes have their beauty
in the falling on the ground.
And everything is perfect.
Uh, pretty much.
[LAUGHTER]
He was always teaching us
from the crazy wisdom style.
And the teaching was
there is no certainty,
and you could have a
sense of humor about that.
We don't want to
really be fully sane.
And that seems to be our
problem, usually, that we
can't handle too much sanity.
And we would like to have a
little corner for neurosis
somewhere, even in our
pockets, just a little puff
here and there.
So if you find too much sanity,
you say, boy, it was heavy.
This is Tantric
tradition of Tibet,
that enjoying your senses
is itself expressing wisdom.
And even Franklin said that
wine is proof that God loves
us and wants us to be happy.
Not a strange idea.
MAN: I need to drink a lot.
[LAUGHING]
So did Thomas Jefferson.
He went broke getting good
wine from France to drink.
[LAUGHING]
It was safe to
say that his level
of awareness in the environment
was unaffected by the alcohol.
Early on, he was giving
a talk with this sort
of Western, New Age guru,
and Rinpoche's presence
in this on the stage was that
he was just completely drunk.
And he actually, I don't think,
ever actually gave a talk.
He was just falling
out of his chair.
And so at the end
of the talk, they
sort of carried
him under his arms
and got him into the elevator.
And he got in the elevator,
and he stepped straight,
and he said, how was that?
[LAUGHING] He wasn't drunk.
He hadn't lost it at all,
but that was how he chose
to relate to this charlatan.
Many people tried to get
Rinpoche to stop drinking.
And they would take petitions
to him and letters to him
and have everybody sign it.
I remember being there one
time, and one of his attendants
served the watered-down
sake, and he
would just left his eyebrow
and say, this is watered down.
It's just basic craziness,
which is fearlessness,
in other word, not
giving up anything,
seemed to be the basic
point, willing to work.
But what is there on the basis
of primordial wakeful quality,
that seemed to be the
definition of crazy wisdom.
--[NON-ENGLISH] the sexuality
issue, the alcohol issue.
I did basically
defend it, actually,
because I liked
Tibetan Buddhism,
and I know there is such
a thing as crazy wisdom.
But I have to acknowledge
certain flaws, I believe.
For example, he passed,
I believe, at 47.
Well, anyway, he could
still be doing fantastically
useful work if he had not
gotten addicted to alcohol,
definitely.
Whatever the exact
diagnosis was,
he definitely drank too much.
People say to me, how could
you follow a teacher like that?
Or how could an
enlightened person do that?
I do not know.
I can't buy a party
line where I say,
it was sacred activity, or
something like this, come
up with ground to make it OK.
I also can't come up
with ground or fixed idea
to make it not OK.
I'm really left in
that I don't know.
I don't know.
But I can't answer the relative
questions, because he defied
being able to answer them.
When Suzuki Roshi
died, Chogyam Trungpa
gave a talk at the Zen Center.
And as he was
giving the talk, he
said that Suzuki
Roshi was a very great
teacher and a very dear friend.
And at that point,
he began to weep.
So he could probably
just sense and see
that we were trying to
hold ourselves back,
and it gave us permission
for all of us to weep.
So that in itself was
a wonderful teaching.
Most cultures at
their inception
had some kind of idea of trying
to bring out the noblest part
of the human spirit.
Rinpoche's search for models
that would work in the West,
he didn't just want to
impose Eastern models
onto his Western students.
In America, the president
of the United States
lives and works in his house.
And in Europe, the place
where the monarch lived
was also the seat of government.
So that's one thing.
I think he realized that
that was a powerful model
that had already existed.
Court was this really rich
environment that was his home,
and it was kind of a community
center at the same time.
In Boulder during
Rinpoche's lifetime,
my main role was the
master of the household,
was my title, of
the Kalapa Court.
Like a typical evening at the
court, the music being played
might be Mozart, Handel.
He loved Handel's Water Music.
Crisp, tongue-in-cheek
British formality,
call each other like Mr.
Pisinger, and this is Fordham.
This is not just like
saying a nice thing,
but that anything and
everything can be met.
When we meet it with awareness,
there's potential to uncover
some kind of power.
And therefore, there
is nothing that
is outside of the practice.
Therefore, he introduced
almost a practice
for anything, absolutely
anything, you know,
drinking a cup of tea,
combing your hair,
putting your
underwear in a drawer.
One time I had the
experience of watching
him set the dining room table.
And it took three hours, because
it was like a work of art
to set the dining room table.
He really found
the way Americans
spoke English to be sloppy.
And he thought it reflected that
if you didn't work with how you
spoke that there
was a way in which
body and mind were not joined.
So speech is one
of the things that
can really join those
so that you have
everything sort of lined up.
You have synchronized your
body, speech, and mind.
So he took that
to the next level,
and he started not
only teaching people
how to speak the
English language,
but he decided to teach
them the Queen's English.
How to speak the
English language
and how not to
speak Americanism.
All right, I'll
give you an example
of an elocution exercise.
(ENUNCIATING
CLEARLY WITH BRITISH
ACCENT) Spider is black.
Sky is blue.
How tantalizing this world.
Cathy's hair is black.
Her complexion is white.
Her attention is like a bow
string, more than monumental,
more than tattered,
more than dying.
The Liberty Bell is
more than antique.
Ultimately, he was
trying to demonstrate
how sound had a sacred element.
So in spite of the appearance of
torturing people by making them
repeat these words
over and over again,
I think it was much
more about appreciation.
So actually, it became
a visualization practice.
You would come on duty,
put on our uniforms,
and walk into a visualization.
We were imagining ourselves
as enlightened servants
of the enlightened master.
And on some level,
it was all true.
On some level, it was reality.
On some level, it was all play.
He said that in order to
create an enlightened society,
you have to change the culture.
And in order to
change the culture,
you have to change the art.
And in order to
change the art, you
have to change the principles
that art is based on.
And those principles,
he said, should be
the principles of Dharma Art.
The basic notion of art at
all means how to relate oneself
and how to relate with one's
phenomena world gracefully.
Dharma Art, rather than looking
at a painting of a river,
is more like being in
the water, in the river.
When there's enough
sense of space,
then we can afford
to relax more,
and we begin to find what's
known as the sacred world,
that any artistic endeavor
is regarded as sacred.
When that happened,
there is no struggle.
The idea in Dharma Art
is to receive images.
It's not an ego trip.
All you did was see it and
bring it to the surface.
You sort of caught the fish.
You didn't create the fish.
CHOGYAM TRUNGPA:
Things are sacred,
not in a sense of religious
means, but sacred in the sense
that there is a natural dignity
in the way we view our world.
He was sitting up on
the altar of this church,
smoking cigarettes.
And someone asked him
a question to talk
about aggression in America.
He said, I want to talk about
the aggression in this room.
MAN: Ready?
Fire!
[EXPLOSION]
[DRUMMING]
This was the Dorje Kasung.
It was given that name
because it literally means
"protecting the sacred space."
Chogyam Trungpa believe
that every aspect of society
had to be explored,
every single aspect.
And so he created
theater groups,
and he created commerce groups.
He created educational
institutions.
And he also created a Buddhist
version of a military.
Everyone had a
hard time with it,
but he would say
over and over again,
until we reach into the heart
of aggression of society
and we transmute that
very same energy to be
the forces of peace,
we couldn't really
change the way things worked.
I was involved
in organizations,
in marches,
protesting the United
States' presence in Vietnam.
What I came to feel was that
those of us who were doing that
had, in the end,
no greater insight
about the fundamental
problem of aggression
than the government
and the Army that we
were protesting against.
The Shambhala principle
is what is known
as the path of the warrior.
Here again, it doesn't mean
to say the creator of a war
as warrior, but warrior
in the sense of braveness,
being brave.
We would drill for
hours in uniform.
And occasionally, we
would have visitors,
and one of those visitors
asked him once, why are
you doing this military thing?
And his response was that some
day people will see the Dorje
Kasung marching down a street,
and it will cause them to feel
like they want to smile.
And at that point, we'll
actually have changed something
at the core of the
modern society,
of the problem, as it was.
It took us 10 years to
figure out that he was
teaching traditional Buddhism.
We didn't know that,
because if you ever
read traditional
Buddhism, you go, huh?
But his incredible ability with
language, to translate that
into our language, so that he
was able to touch your heart,
and he was also able to sort
of make your mind inquisitive.
So your constant feeling was
that your journey was truly
what is traditionally
described as the path is going
underneath you and you are
just continually opening up
to whatever you
are encountering.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
First time I met Trungpa
Rinpoche, John said, Rinpoche,
I'd like to introduce
you to my wife Agnes.
And Rinpoche looked like
this, and he took my hand,
and he said, hello.
And then he turned
to John and said,
I find your wife
very attractive.
And I leaped off the floor
and jumped in the back of John
and looked at Rinpoche over
John's shoulder, thinking,
what is he talking about?
Or who is this man?
Lots of his students were his
lovers, and that was known.
My impression as I sort of
looked at your community
was that this was like
part of what went on,
and it was certainly open.
I remember watching
Rinpoche with his entourage,
and you could just sort see
who was who in the entourage.
Of course, in the Zen world,
things were more hidden,
I think we could say.
And so the issue there became
more that things were hidden.
He didn't hide anything.
He didn't hide his drinking.
He didn't hide his sexuality.
There's so many Western
teachers, as well as
Asian teachers in
the West, who have
been brought down by what's
called sexual misconduct.
But if you really look
closely, that's not
what caused them to come down.
It was that the students
felt deceived and lied to.
The first time he slept with
somebody after I married him,
he was still at Samye Ling, and
I was completely freaked out.
I sat on the floor
of the bathroom
and just cried all night.
And the next day, I went
in, and I talked to him
and told him I was
completely destroyed.
I couldn't believe that
he just married me,
and now maybe I
had to divorce him
because he was sleeping around.
And he said to me, it's
not that I don't love you.
Our relationship is much, much
stronger and more powerful
than sexual fidelity,
so to speak.
I'm never going to be able
to be a conventional husband,
but you can always
completely, 100%
percent rely on our relationship
and our love for each other.
But it's just not going
to be conventional.
Sexual activity, what there
was, it was about liberating
desire rather than
creating more desire.
And so you take
that place of desire
where it's the most, which
is in the sexual activity,
and you apply some
kind of wakefulness,
some kind of where
you actually are
present all the way through.
So it's a very potent
place to work from.
You know, sometimes
I would sit with him
for hours, two, three, four
hours, in almost total silence.
So sometimes it
was really lonely.
You know, my husband
Jonathan has always said--
and we were married, so those
weren't easy times for him.
And he's always said, and not
always in an enlightened way,
I'm second to the teacher.
I'm second to the guru.
And it's true.
I was jealous.
It was much more
of, huh, you're able
to have a special relationship
with him, and I can't.
Actually calling
it a relationship
is even tricky, because
there wasn't that kind
of solidity to it, really.
We're not talking about the
person Trungpa Rinpoche.
But we are talking
about the manifestation
of that mind, which
sees reality as it is
and is able to wake people up.
But only because
you share that mind.
In the West, it's easy
to misunderstand devotion
in the Tibetan tradition.
It looks from the outside as
if there's this great, great
person and then these
little people falling
at the great person's feet.
But in fact, the tradition
itself is very clear
that the teacher has nothing
more than the student,
that the wisdom exists already.
We're born with it.
We die with it.
We can't get rid of it.
We can get more of it.
The teacher points that out,
and the student gradually
comes to that understanding.
And the minds meet.
After being married
to him for 17 years,
I would still sometimes lie in
bed next to him and look at him
and thinking, I have
no idea who you are.
I mean, he was
completely unfathomable.
You could never really
second guess his reaction.
Love.
Talking about love
is like an insult,
sort of, to like
our relationship.
Because it was just
like he treated me
as the reincarnated lama
that I recognized as.
So in terms of love
with my father,
did we ever talk about love?
There was never any talk
of something like that.
I mean, he treated me like
he would have treated a king
of another country, you know?
You always knew that
his intentions were good,
and you can always expect
that he would be kind.
But fundamentally, I don't
really know what made him tick.
ACTOR AS CHOGYAM TRUNGPA: "When
I ride a horse, I hold my seat.
When I play with snakes,
I snap them on my wrist.
When I play with
dangerous maidens,
I let them talk first."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Crazy wisdom, as
I understand it,
means not planting your foot
firmly either in the material
world or the spiritual world.
We may have the
spiritual world view.
Then we are bounded by this
so-called spiritual view.
Then when we are
materialistic, we're
bounded by this so-called
materialistic view.
But if you go beyond that,
if you take this extra leap,
then that is the
crazy wisdom leap.
It's like taking a
leap into the abyss.
But it's not the
abyss of nothingness.
It's the abyss of reality.
He could have had,
I think, success
without fully committing
himself in the way he did.
He could have had a nice
community and a good life
as it were, but he
really never thought
about his own self-preservation.
[MUSIC  PLAYING]
He taught me so much.
He taught me everything
that I know about art.
And he showed it to me by being
genuinely, fully who he was.
He was human, completely human.
And he didn't hide it.
He didn't hide his tears.
He didn't hide his wounds.
It was his way of saying, you
know, it's a form of strength.
So when you feel that
tenderness in you,
then you become stronger.
He lived his life-- he was
like the greatest Bodhisattva.
Bodhisattva vows
to give up anything
that has to do with himself
and help other people.
And that's all he
was ever doing.
Now see, you're
gonna make me cry.
[LAUGHING]
That's all he was doing.
I can't believe I
went to the hospital,
and I had some question
about the interior decoration
of a suite on Tower Road.
And Rinpoche was dying.
And I went to his bedside,
and it was like, well,
I know he can't
hear me, but I could
kind of verbalize my thought.
And maybe I will receive
some kind of answer
about what should
happen in this case.
And it was almost like a
television screen came up
in front of me and it was
static, black and white static
all across it.
It's over-- no more questions.
REPORTER: A belt of pack ice
covered 3/4 of the harbor
and extended nearly eight
nautical miles out to sea.
Pack ice is common
at this time of year,
but it rarely reaches Halifax.
The whole sea coast,
when you looked out,
it looked all frozen and cold.
And that's how we all felt,
because he was passing away.
He opened his eyes
and almost sat up.
Everybody was kind of
waiting for that moment.
Everybody got the message that
he was communicating with us,
that this was going to be it.
There's a moment here that this
is going to be my last word,
and it's going to be to you.
You had that feeling,
everybody waiting.
[SINGING]
And at one point, we
started to sing the anthem,
the Shambhala anthem.
I don't know how it started.
Maybe someone said,
let's sing the anthem.
We sang the anthem.
And it was kind of like-- it
was like on our last offering
to him.
[SINGING]
He opened his eyes, and
he looked around the room.
And as the anthem finished,
he took a few more breaths,
and with each out
breath, we'd be
waiting, because we didn't know
whether there'd be another one.
And so then I went outside.
The ice had started moving out.
And by the end of the
day or the next morning--
there was a lot of ice--
it had all gone out.
And the sky got blue.
[SINGING]
[BAGPIPES PLAYING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I've seen teachers who
have tried to emulate him.
And for a few years,
maybe it's fun.
But day in and day out,
every year, 24 hours,
they say, I don't
know how he did it.
So you can really say, well,
it's either he was crazy,
or he was crazy wisdom and
there was something very amazing
about him.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Even in a film like this, if
the message were to be conveyed
that he was about being
defined or framed in any way
whatsoever, that would defy
the whole purpose of his life,
which was to allow ourselves
to be unframed and fluid
and allow others to
come forth in their sort
of basic goodness.
[INDISTINCT PRAYING]
[CHANTING]
[EXPLOSION]
[CLANGING]
You see it?
I see it.
I'm not convinced
that's it's phenomenal.
It's completely around the sun.
And there's one
right over there.
MAN: Rainbows.
[LAUGHTER]
Something in the clouds,
something in the sky.
[MUSIC PLAYING]